PSMDB-1684 Release notes 7.0.22-12 (#1026)
percona/psmdb-docs: docs/release_notes/7.0.21-12.md

# Percona Server for MongoDB 7.0.21-12 ({{date.7_0_21}})

[Installation](../install/index.md){.md-button}
[Upgrade from MongoDB Community](../install/upgrade-from-mongodb.md){.md-button}

Percona Server for MongoDB 7.0.21-12 is an enhanced, source-available, and highly-scalable database that is a
fully-compatible, drop-in replacement for MongoDB Community Edition.

> Percona Server for MongoDB 7.0.21-12 includes the improvements and bug fixes of [MongoDB 7.0.19 Community Edition](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/release-notes/7.0/#7.0.19---apr-14--2025) through [MongoDB 7.0.21 Community Edition](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/release-notes/7.0/#7.0.21---upcoming). It supports protocols and drivers of MongoDB versions 7.0.19 - 7.0.21.

Reviewer: shouldn't we make easier to also provide a link to 7.0.20?

Author: Added the one below where we list all release notes

## Release highlights

This release provides the following features and improvements:

> ### Boost performance during cluster restore and scaling with file copy based initial sync

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Boost performance during Replica Set member restore and scale out with file copy-based initial sync
```

Author: Updated

> ### Boost performance during cluster restore and scaling with file copy based initial sync

Reviewer: Additionally, as a highlight - I think it'd be good to add a screenshot of performance results (once we have it) and state what's the minimum database size that FCBIS provide benefit (logical sync is actually faster on small databases).

Reviewer 2: The early test results suggest that there is performance gain only in case of really big instances. For small instances logical sync might be faster because the data is much smaller than wiredtiger's binary logs.

Author: No results then?

Reviewer: We need to wait for more test from @olexandr-havryliak  - we should have it before GA :)

> You can now select how a newly added or a restored replica set member receives the data from other members - via logical or file copy based sync. File copy based sync is the copying of physical files rather than actual data clone. This makes this sync method is faster than the logical one and it reduces your maintenance time on scaling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now select how a newly added or restored replica set member initializes the data from other members via logical or file copy-based sync. File copy-based initial sync copies physical files rather than an actual data clone. This initial sync method is faster than the logical one and reduces your maintenance time on scaling the cluster.
```

Author: Updated

> This functionality is available in [Percona Server for MongoDB Pro](../psmdb-pro.md) out of the box. Become a Percona Customer to enjoy all Pro features with little to no effort from your side.

Reviewer: Alternatively, build from sources...  (we need to be always sharp that it's not open core and we provide clear way to get all features by everyone.

Author: Added

### Packaging changes

> Percona Server for MongoDB 7.0.21-12 is no longer supported on Ubuntu 20.04 (Focal Fossa) as this operating system has reached end of life. If you’re not ready to upgrade to a newer Ubuntu OS but still want to update Percona Server for MongoDB, contact us! We're here to make your databases run better.

Reviewer: Add link to contact form: https://hubs.ly/Q03rRtDg0

Author: Done

* [SERVER-97044](https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/SERVER-97044) -  Fixed an issue where change streams might incorrectly output a "drop" event during resharding or unsharding of a collection that is or was using zone sharding
* [WT-12012](https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/WT-12012) - Fixed the issue when a generation drain process in WiredTiger, which manages eviction of older data, encounters an issue and then resolves itself when the verbosity levels for eviction and checkpoint operations increase. The issue is fixed by restoring original verbosity levels for these operations.

Find the full list of changes in the release notes of [MongoDB 7.0.19 Community Edition](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/release-notes/7.0/#7.0.19---apr-14--2025) through [MongoDB 7.0.21 Community Edition release notes](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/release-notes/7.0/#7.0.21---upcoming).

## Changelog

### New Features

* [PSMDB-1284](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PSMDB-1284) - Add the ability to perform file copy-based initial sync

> 

Reviewer 2: This release will also include PSMDB-1619, PSMDB-1633, PSMDB-1634

Author: Added

[Upgrade from MongoDB Community](../install/upgrade-from-mongodb.md){.md-button}

Percona Server for MongoDB 7.0.21-12 is an enhanced, source-available, and highly-scalable database that is a
fully-compatible, drop-in replacement for MongoDB Community Edition.

Percona Server for MongoDB 7.0.21-12 includes the improvements and bug fixes of [MongoDB 7.0.19 Community Edition](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/release-notes/7.0/#7.0.19---apr-14--2025) through [MongoDB 7.0.21 Community Edition](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/release-notes/7.0/#7.0.21---jun-04--2025). It supports protocols and drivers of MongoDB versions 7.0.19 - 7.0.21.

## Release highlights

This release provides the following features and improvements:

### Boost performance during cluster restore and scaling with file copy-based initial sync

You can now select how a newly added or a restored replica set member synchronizes the data from other members - via logical or file copy-based initial sync. File copy-based initial sync copies physical files from the source node. This sync method is faster than the logical one and it reduces your maintenance time on scaling your cluster.

> This feature is available in [Percona Server for MongoDB Pro](../psmdb-pro.md) out of the box. Become a Percona Customer to enjoy all Pro features with little to no effort from your side. Alternatively, you can receive it by building Percona Server from the source code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature is available in [Percona Server for MongoDB Pro](../psmdb-pro.md) out of the box. Become a Percona Customer to enjoy all Pro features with little to no effort from your side. Alternatively, you can receive it by building Percona Server from the [source code](../install/source.md).
```

Find the full list of changes in the release notes of [MongoDB 7.0.19 Community Edition](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/release-notes/7.0/#7.0.19---apr-14--2025), [MongoDB 7.0.20 Community Edition](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/release-notes/7.0/#7.0.20---apr-29--2025) and [MongoDB 7.0.21 Community Edition release notes](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/release-notes/7.0/#7.0.21---jun-04--2025).

## Changelog

### New Features

* [PSMDB-1284](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PSMDB-1284) - Add the ability to perform file copy-based initial sync

### Improvements

* [PSMDB-1619](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PSMDB-1619) - Make log rotation behavior compatible with MongoDB by renaming existing log file to a name with a timestamp and start a new one

> * [PSMDB-1633](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PSMDB-1633) - Implemented 'encryptionAtRest' field in 'serverStatus()'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [PSMDB-1633](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PSMDB-1633) - Added 'encryptionAtRest' field in 'serverStatus()'
```

> * [PSMDB-1634](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PSMDB-1634) - Improved the `mongod.1` manpage by adding reference to official documentation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [PSMDB-1634](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/PSMDB-1634) - Simplified the `mongod.1` manpage by adding a reference to official documentation.
```
